****

**Details**
1 hour
20% of [[HY4131]]
Submitted on Apr. 11, 2025

****

**Question**
“The escalation of the Cold War by President Ronald Reagan laid the foundation for the eventual dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.” Do you agree?

****

**Essay**

I agree with the statement above. Indeed, Mr. Reagan’s policies were devastating to a weakening Soviet Union and sped up the decade-long road to its dissolution. In particular, the Reagan Doctrine, in aiding anti-communist governments and insurgencies worldwide, escalated conflicts such as the Soviet-Afghan War and indirectly accelerated the Soviet Union’s economic downfall, paving the way for its eventual dissolution. I posit two points: that the economic decline of the Soviet Union was exacerbated by Reagan’s general aggressive anti-communist foreign policy, and that this economic decline directly led to, and accelerated, the eventual dissolution of the Soviet Union.

*Economic decline of the USSR was exacerbated by Reagan*

By the late 1970s, the USSR’s economic weaknesses were becoming apparent. The growth of its rigid centralized command economy, developed under the Communist model, had dramatically slowed. Soviet workers were satisfied with hitting their daily quotas (and nothing more), causing inefficiency, stagnation, and a lack of technological innovation. This weakness was exacerbated by Reagan’s decision to fund anti-communist rebels in every part of the world.

This economic weakness was exacerbated by the Soviet-Afghan War, where Reagan provided assistance to the anti-Soviet Mujahideen fighters through material support. This support enhanced the rebels’ military capabilities, resulting in a greater ability for them to resist the Soviet military and allowing them to continue their guerrilla operations until 1989, when the Soviets finally withdrew. The ten years of this costly war greatly weakened the Soviet economy as it had forced an increase in its military budget, resulting in a reduction in available domestic investment into areas such as infrastructure and education — directly leading to a decrease in quality of life.

Besides assisting the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) in Afghanistan, the USSR had also maintained a costly global military presence and supported communist regimes, which exacerbated its economic downturn. Reagan’s policies acted on this by assisting anti-communist rebels around the world, particularly in Central America. For instance, the U.S. covertly assisted the Contra rebels fighting to oust the Cuban-backed Sandinista government in Nicaragua, as well as in the Grenada War, where Grenada’s Communist regime was removed and a democratic, pro-American government was restored. These American victories under the Reagan Doctrine rolled back the influence of communism in Central America; this overt active military support of those fighting against communist dominance was only made possible by the National Security Decision Directive 75, which had been approved and possibly formulated by Reagan in 1983. This directive declared U.S. policy toward the USSR to be to contain and reverse Soviet expansionism — potentially drawing parallels to 1960s American military action (which, at that time, had been caused by fears of the Eisenhower-proposed domino theory becoming a reality). Even in regions such as North Africa, communist regimes continued to be attacked and toppled by Reagan. For instance, in Libya, Reagan ordered a massive air campaign aimed at dissuading Qadaffi (an alleged adherent of the Soviet Union who supported terrorism and kidnapping attacks) from continuing to support terrorism. The bombing by American planes decimated Qadaffi’s compound, greatly weakening his power and command. Reagan’s continuity in expressing his belief in the necessity of counteracting the Soviet Union and communism in general, directly led to American military actions in those nations, crippling the Soviet Union’s network of allied communist regimes and worsening its economic situation.

In essence, the victory of anti-communist forces in Afghanistan, Grenada, Nicaragua, Libya, and numerous other nations drained the USSR of valuable resources, personnel, and allies. It also curbed the spread of communism in those regions. These victories, which had been made possible by the Reagan Doctrine and the NSDD 75 which had been approved by him, forced the USSR to increase its defense spending, leading to further economic weaknesses at home.

*Economic decline of the USSR caused its dissolution*

Reagan’s aggressive anti-communist policies exacerbated economic decline; this decline directly led to the dissolution of the USSR.

In 1989, economist Andrei Kozyrev observed that “the Soviet economy is like a man with a hundred pounds of iron on his back. He cannot stand straight and cannot move forward.” Indeed, the crippling economic situation played arguably the most important role in the eventual collapse of the Soviet Union because it reduced the legitimacy of the Soviet government, caused morale to fall, and led to the failure of Communism in Eastern Europe. To make matters worse for the USSR, Reagan and the U.S. also worked with anti-communist groups in the region, facilitating the fall of communism there. The worsening economic situation, in essence, led to a chain reaction which could not be stopped.

The first step in this chain reaction was undermining the morale of citizens in both the USSR and Eastern Bloc nations. Reagan’s policies drained the USSR’s reserves which decreased available trade and financial assistance to Eastern Bloc nations. In particular, protests over food shortages and the high price of consumer products led to the rise in popularity of the anti-communist trade union Solidarity. Although the union was banned in 1982, Reagan continued to “stir up trouble to the Soviets” in Poland by agreeing to provide finances to the Catholic Church to undermine communist control of the nation. Especially significant was Pope John Paul II, who was a Pole and was deeply popular and respected by the Polish. His June 1983 visit to Poland directly heightened the Polish desire to rise up against communism and secured the release of Solidarity members such as its leader, Lech Walesa. Reagan and the CIA also provided Solidarity with communication technology to keep the movement alive. In the mid-1980s, as a result of decreased assistance to Eastern Bloc nations by the USSR, the Polish economy continued to decline, and countrywide protests spread again in 1988. Workers went on strike, leading to talks between the Solidarity leadership and the Polish government — one year later, in 1989, an agreement was reached which established an unprecedented anti-communist government in the Eastern Bloc nation Poland.

The second step in the chain reaction was the fall of Communism in other Eastern Bloc nations including East Germany, Hungary, Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Bulgaria. When Solidarity became the Polish government — perhaps even before that, when it gained popularity — other Eastern Bloc nations realized that they too had the power to protest (made possible by Gorbachev’s glasnost policy which encouraged open dialogue) and could feasibly establish democratic governments. Reagan directly added fuel to this fire. In June 1987, Reagan, standing at Moscow State University in West Berlin, publicly implored Gorbachev and the Soviet Union to dismantle the Berlin Wall which had separated West and East Berlin since 1961. In front of a huge crowd, he directly demanded Gorbachev to “tear down the wall”, increasing anti-communist sentiments among the students there. Three years later, democratic governments took control of Eastern Bloc nations. In those countries, massive protests were triggered by economic problems exacerbated by the USSR’s weakness. Reagan’s attacks against the USSR further weakened the legitimacy of the Soviet government, reducing trust. In Hungary, for example, the border with Austria was reopened in 1989 following the Hungarian Revolution. In East Germany, thousands of people left for the West through Hungary, rendering the Berlin Wall ineffective. With a poor economy and a weak military, the USSR was not prepared to send in forces and opened the border in November 1989, representing the waning of Soviet control, leading to the successful holding of free elections in Eastern Bloc nations without fearing retribution from Moscow.

As its satellite regimes fell, so did the power and legitimacy of the government in Moscow. Step by step, the Soviet Union collapsed, with its constituent republics declaring independence in rapid succession. By February 1990, pro-reform demonstrators were able to hold huge rallies across the Soviet Union and the Communist Party had surrendered its monopoly of power. The Warsaw Pact was disbanded in April 1991. Four months later, the Baltic States declared independence from the Soviet Union, and on Christmas Day in 1991, the Soviet Union left with a whimper with the resignation of Gorbachev.

To summarize, Reagan’s aggressive foreign policies drained the Soviet Union’s coffers, directly leading to its dissolution as it increased economic scarcity such (as food shortages) which contributed to low morale and protests against communist governments in the Eastern Bloc. Those governments were replaced by democratic ones in 1989 and 1990; in 1991, the Soviet Union’s constituent republics declared independence as the power of the central government decreased and the communist government accepted that the USSR’s dissolution was inevitable.

*Conclusion*

President Reagan implemented decisive foreign policy which was directly aimed at curbing the spread of communism in all areas of the world. He did this under the Reagan Doctrine, which launched military actions against anti-communist regimes worldwide. This drained the Soviet Union’s economy and worsened the economic situation in not only the Soviet Union, but Eastern Bloc nations. Protests quickly emerged in those nations and anti-communist opposition groups were supported through financial assistance by Reagan and the United States. One by one, Eastern Bloc governments became democratic; communist regimes were toppled. The Soviet Union dissolved soon after as its legitimacy eroded. In summary, Ronald Reagan, in escalating the Cold War, not only laid the foundation but rapidly accelerated the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.

****

**Grade**
**B+** / 4.0 GP

