**** 

**Details**
2 hours 30 minutes
30% of [[HY4131]]
Submitted on Apr. 22, 2025

****

**Question 1**

****

**Essay 1**

*Introduction*

I agree with the statement to a great extent as George H. W. Bush envisioned and put into place a neo-liberal internationalist order because he understood that multilateralism and collective security were essential to ensuring post-Cold War stability. His foreign policy, in its prioritization of diplomacy and emphasis of international consensus, also mostly reflected idealism, although it is true that the administration was realist (when necessary), as seen in its dealing with rogue states such as Iraq; however, idealism was still one of the defining features of his administration’s foreign policy.

*Extent of Multilateralism of the Bush administration*

Bush took office in 1989, two years before the dissolution of the Soviet Union. In the late 1980s, the USSR was in rapid decline, with a weak economy and an even weaker grip on its satellite states in Eastern Europe, setting the tone for its dissolution. As a result, Bush likely understood that the USSR could no longer be considered as a world power, cementing the status of the U.S. as a global hegemon. Bush had also been an envoy to China, ambassador to the United Nations, and director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), all of which involve primary aspects of diplomacy and cooperation with other nations. As such, it is not surprising that Bush prioritized multilateralism in his administration. This was reflected in two key ways: the internationalism in his foreign policy and his aims to build new multilateral structures for global security while avoiding triumphalism.

First, the foreign policy of the Bush administration was extremely internationalist, with the aim of spreading liberty abroad to pursue American economic interests and to seek security through a world reformed in accordance with American principles. Unlike earlier presidents such as Reagan, Bush emphasized international consensus and the legitimacy of the United Nations. We can see this emphasis firstly in his dealings with Gorbachev, where he was open to signing a treaty that eventually paved the way toward newfound and unprecedented cooperation between the two former enemy nations. Bush also maintained his doctrine of establishing a “New World Order”, where diplomacy was emphasized, by attempting to expand the power and influence of the United Nations and to make it responsible for not only governing the political and economic affairs of states around the world, but also to oversee social affairs and decisions. In his 1990 speech on this Order, Bush also stated that this arrangement would create a world that was secure in the quest for peace, further reflecting the internationalism of his administration, because the United Nations had always integrally favored democratic principles, and therefore making it more powerful would aid in reforming the world in accordance with American principles (which was a key principle of American internationalism). In short, he desired a credible United Nations which could use its peacekeeping role to fulfill the promise and vision of the UN’s founders. On this topic, scholar Joseph Nye also commented that power has been becoming more multidimensional, structures more complex, and states themselves more permeable (the transfer of national authority and sovereignty to mediums such as the United Nations). Bush envisioned the United States as a benign hegemon that would lead through strong institutions and alliances rather than unrestrained unilateralism; due to this, his administration was marked by multilateralism.

Second, Bush also aimed to build new multilateral structures to ensure global security. Besides the United Nations, Bush’s administration sought to increase the power and scope of agreements and international structures such as NAFTA (the North American Free Trade Agreement) and the WTO (World Trade Organization). This was done partly because of the newfound American status of being the sole superpower, and therefore trade with other countries became increasingly important to establish friendly relations with them and to improve the economic situations in those countries. We can see this through another Bush speech in 1991 on the New World Order, where he talked about the importance of utilizing American successes to achieve prosperity through a common set of principles and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The pursuit of free trade and development of international economic institutions (to achieve a globalized economy) ultimately further reflected the multilateralism of the Bush administration as Bush believed in the beneficial effects of complex economic interdependence.

To conclude, multilateralism was a key part of the Bush administration because he prioritized diplomatic engagement and multilateral coalitions.

*Extent of Idealism of the Bush administration*

The Bush administration was generally idealist even though there were indeed times where it practiced realism. On that note, however, I still agree that the idealism that he practiced was a defining feature of foreign policy during his administration because no nation could have truly been fully idealist in the 1990s without risking its national security (especially with the backdrop of continuing conflicts in rogue nations and politically unstable regions such as the Middle East), and because the scale of his idealism was much larger than that of his immediate predecessors.

First, idealism was shown in his dealings with China in 1989 when the Chinese military violently overtook pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square. Even though the international community called for military action to be taken against the Chinese, Bush instead used sanctions in order to appease the Chinese as he did not wish for the drastically improved relations between China and the U.S. to be ruined. Although those sanctions failed in the end, his use of them was still idealist as it reflected his desire for compromise with China.

Idealism was also seen in his administration’s action in the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. In 1991, Bush hosted a meeting with leaders of both Israel and Palestine (two opposing rivals) and was hailed by Palestinians as an ally of Israel who was able and willing to encourage Israel to be more moderate than decisive and aggressive. Ultimately, two years later, the Oslo Accords were signed where both sides agreed to create the Palestinian Authority and cooperate in the future. This showed that Bush saw potential for compromise between the two nations and acted on it, eventually paving the path for multilateral cooperation. In this regard, his dealings were idealist.

Of course, there were multiple occasions when Bush had to be more realist, but even so, his military use was strategic and limited. The fall of the Soviet Union created new geopolitical dynamics around the world; even though America’s biggest rival was now gone, it still had to face smaller opposing nations. It should be noted that these occasions of realism were all marked by grave and immediate threats to U.S. national security, and I argue that his practices of realism in these cases were therefore rational.

In Panama, Manuel Noriega (sponsored by U.S. during the Reagan administration) had begun to fund the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua, which the U.S. had staunchly opposed. He also had ensured his election as President of Panama through a campaign of terror. As Panama was in Central America, Bush likely viewed Noriega’s regime as a major threat to American national security, particularly because Noriega’s violence could inspire similar outcomes in other Central American countries, marking a grave threat on American borders. He therefore approved of a coup against him. Coincidentally, Noriega had also ordered an attack on American servicemen around the time of the proposed coup; Bush now had a genuine reason to intervene and dispose of Noriega. The invasion of Panama was, however, strategic and limited. It lasted less than a month with minimal Panamanian civilian casualties and Noriega was quickly arrested and placed in an American prison.

Over in the Middle East, Bush ordered U.S. intervention in Kuwait and Iraq as he feared that if it did not, more states would rise against the United States and the general international system. This was reasonable, as the Middle East was arguably a gateway to, and influence on, both Africa, Asia, and even Europe; he therefore intervened not only to protect American national security, but to defend the international system which he had built up over the past year. The operation was not unilateralist, however, as Bush emphasized the importance of a coalition of nations to act quickly against Iraq. In a mark of multilateralism, even the USSR agreed to cooperate with the U.S. So did Great Britain, France, Canada, and other countries; a coalition was therefore formed. The war lasted for only a month. Even though this invasion was based on a pessimistic view of power dynamics in the Middle East, it also had a hint of idealism as Bush sought cooperation with previous rivals such as the Soviet Union.

To conclude, the Bush administration practiced a mix of idealism and realism. It was realist only when dealing with rogue states (meaning nations which posed an immediate threat on American national security). As it can be argued that no world power could truly have been fully idealist during the volatile 1990s, I posit that the Bush administration’s idealism (in its dealings with China, Israel, and Palestine) defined its foreign policy, not its realism.

*Conclusion*

In summary, idealism and multilateralism were indeed the defining features of U.S. foreign policy during the Bush administration. Idealism was practiced through an optimistic view of nations and the administration’s relative openness to seek ways to cooperate with other nations through careful diplomacy and coalition-building. This idealism was practiced through multilateral cooperation with other states, which the Bush administration exemplified through its cooperation with Gorbachev and the USSR, the establishment of a New World Order, and the creation of strong multilateral economic and political structures which advanced liberty and reformed the world in accordance with American principles.

****

**Question 2**

****

**Essay 2**

*Introduction*

As a set, the documents generally disagree with the notion that U.S. involvement had contributed to making Afghanistan a quagmire for the Soviet Union. Although American involvement had certainly helped, it was very limited and small in scale; therefore, it must be noted that it was generally a non-factor in the USSR having been bogged down in a quagmire: the more integral reason was the inefficiency of the Soviet Army against the guerrilla Mujahideen fighters.

*Document B and C agree with the thesis to a very limited extent*

Documents B and C, in combination, provide two pieces of information: that the United States influenced Amin in 1979 which may have caused him to consider leaning toward the U.S. and breaking free from Soviet influence, and that the U.S. funding of the Mujahideen began in July 1979 which allowed the Muslim rebels to gain greater control over Afghanistan in a shorter period of time, forcing the Soviets to react and invade Afghanistan.

Document B partially agrees with the thesis. In this private message between Soviet officials three days after the Soviet invasion had begun, Amin was depicted as a volatile leader with “secret activities” which forewarned of a “possible political shift” to the West, meaning the United States. In the document, it is also explained that he had contacts with an American agent, and that he also promised to tribal leaders to shift away from the USSR and to adopt a more neutral stance. He held closed meetings as well in which attacks were made against Soviet policy and the activities of Soviet specialists. At face value, this document could have been taken to imply that the Americans had influenced Amin to break away from the USSR. However, this may not have truly been the case. The details about the “contacts with an American agent” was vague. Furthermore, Amin’s promises to tribal leaders could simply have been ones of appeasement, as those tribal leaders were likely Muslim or religious, and in that case, they would have been strongly opposed to communism, which was seen as an atheist ideology. As a result, the Americans could have had the effect of making Moscow afraid that Amin was going to switch his allegiance to the U.S, but it was only a possibility, not an actuality; it should be noted that Amin was still a communist anyway which would have made cooperation with the U.S. difficult. Furthermore, even if Amin had been successfully persuaded by the U.S. to become an American ally, he was still not the most integral factor in the Soviets getting bogged down in a quagmire. Even if the U.S. could have actually, in its influence of Amin, forced the Soviets to invade (as it wanted to protect its communist-leaning buffer state), it can still be argued that poor military tactics and corruption in the Soviet Army were really the two most important reasons that led to the eventual stalemate. The U.S, at most, only contributed to it; it was Soviet military incompetency that caused the USSR to get bogged down in the quagmire.

Document C agrees with the thesis as it shows that the United States had began funding the Mujahideen six months before the Soviet attack, with former National Security Advisor Brzezinski also noting that he thought this aid was going to induce a Soviet military intervention by “drawing the Russians into the Afghan trap”. Brzezinski also said that he knew the U.S. now had the opportunity to give the USSR its Vietnam War, implying that the American intention was for the Soviets to eventually become bogged down in a quagmire (which indeed was a factor in the eventual dissolution of the USSR). The document is likely reliable, since Brzezinski is a respected political figure. However, there is a possibility that Brzezinski could have overexaggerated the importance of American military aid to the Mujahideen: only 25% of the group’s funding came from the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, United States, Pakistan, and Egypt, with the vast majority of its funding being from private donors; therefore, the opinion that “this aid was going to induce a Soviet military intervention” could maybe have been flawed. It was true that U.S. aid to the Mujahideen could have heightened the scope of its operations and made the Soviets react more promptly; Brzezinski, seeing Afghanistan as the Soviet’s Vietnam, believed that U.S. support to the Mujahideen would ultimately bog down and bleed Soviet resources. However, it is even more likely that the Soviet Union could have invaded Afghanistan regardless of whether the Mujahideen had been funded by the U.S, because the USSR had upheld the Brezhnev Doctrine of militaristic communism; with KGB head Andropov having persuaded Brezhnev that Amin’s ruthless and unstable regime could create exploitable weaknesses for the United States, it is likely that the USSR would have stepped in to militarily enforce the Brezhnev Doctrine by defending the communist regime in Afghanistan regardless of whether the Mujahideen posed a grave threat to the regime (without U.S. funding), or an even graver one (with U.S. funding).

In summary, Documents B and C do agree with the thesis at face value; however, it is dubious whether they are truly connected to the USSR being bogged down in a quagmire five years later in Afghanistan. They could have pushed the Soviets’ hand in intervening in Afghanistan, but it is also likely that they could have intervened in Afghanistan regardless due to the Brezhnev Doctrine and the inherent weakness of the Amin regime.

*Documents A, D, and E disagree with the thesis*

Documents A, D, and E, in combination, refute the thesis.

Document A strongly disagrees with the thesis. It is an American report written before the war, showing that the U.S. thought the Soviets would “go to some lengths to protect their interests in Afghanistan, but probably not to the extent of intervening militarily”, and that the Soviets would be “deterred by the prospects that their forces would be bogged down indefinitely trying to shore up a discredited regime”. This conclusively shows that the United States did not even consider the possibility of the Soviet Union invading Afghanistan. It also reflects the fact that the American financial support to the Mujahideen in late 1979, if any, was not primarily aimed at forcing the Soviets to react militarily; rather they might just have sought to weaken the unstable and terrorizing Amin regime. The Soviet military intervention in December 1979, and consequent “quagmire”, therefore, was not mainly because of the United States provided funding to the Mujahideen or tried to sway Amin’s regime; instead, it likely was a rational decision by the Soviets who followed the Brezhnev Doctrine to protect Afghanistan’s communist government from the Mujahideen regime; by 1979 or 1980, the Soviets would probably have invaded regardless of actions taken by the United States. The United States knew, from the document, that in the case of a Soviet intervention the USSR military would likely have been bogged down in a quagmire and so thought that the USSR would likely not take any military action. Yet the USSR invaded anyway; getting stuck in the quagmire was therefore ultimately its own fault.

Document D also disagrees with the thesis. It argues that in 1979, the United States did little in Afghanistan; this is a valid proposition because its influence on Amin and funding of the Mujahideen was, at most, limited. The document also states that there was an internal power struggle in Afghanistan which posed a grave threat to the Afghanistan government and that the PDPA was in internal disarray and was politically incompetent. Furthermore, it states that “nothing the United States did that summer led to the fiasco of Amin’s victory over Taraki”. This document therefore conclusively shows that the U.S’s actions were insignificant in the broader backdrop of the incapability of the Afghanistan government and the popularity of the Mujahideen; recalling that the Mujahideen was a Muslim movement and the predominantly Muslim population in Afghanistan opposed communism, it can be deduced that the Mujahideen would have gained lots of traction anyway. This document strongly shows that the Soviets invaded Afghanistan because of its desire to protect the weak Afghanistan regime; in comparison, the U.S. funding of Mujahideen and work to cooperate with Amin was largely insignificant. This shows that the U.S. was basically a non-factor in the buildup to the Soviet intervention; now, if it was not even a big factor in forcing the Soviets to intervene, it would have been an even smaller factor in getting the Soviets bogged down in its Afghan quagmire as its aid to the Mujahideen from 1980 to 1985 was ultimately limited. Therefore, the document disproves the thesis.

Document E states that the Soviets were wary of their poor economic situation which could have caused them getting bogged down in its quagmire in Afghanistan. In the late 1980s, the Soviet economy was in rapid decline, partly due to Gorbachev’s unsuccessful glasnost policy; the Afghanistan war was draining the Soviet Union’s resources and money. “The sum is enormous” reflects the idea that the USSR could no longer afford a protracted war in Afghanistan, and that getting bogged down in the quagmire could be a result of economic strain (and of course the numerous failed offensives including the Panjshar Valley Offensive where the Soviets lost thousands of men). This disproves the thesis as it shows that the Soviets were bogged down in a quagmire because it could not afford more lives and more money lost as a result of the war, not American involvement. In particular, Soviet tactics were inefficient, and the USSR military could not cope with the guerrilla tactics of the Mujahideen which employed a hit-and-run strategy to great results; in contrast, the Soviet tactic of search-and-destroy was ineffective in the mountainous terrain of Afghanistan.

In summary, documents A, D, and E disprove the thesis as it shows that American involvement ultimately did not cause the Soviets to get bogged down in the Afghan quagmire; even if there was no American aid to the Mujahideen, the Soviets would have been stalemated anyway. Aid to the Mujahideen by the U.S. was by all accounts limited; it was therefore the declining economic situation in the USSR which caused the collapse of the Soviet war effort in Afghanistan.

*Conclusion*

In conclusion, even though documents B and C agree with the thesis (in a limited manner), documents A, D, and E completely disprove the thesis. Documents B and C showed that the United States could have been involved in Afghanistan (by talking with Amin and funding the Mujahideen) before the Soviets invaded which paved the way for the Soviet intervention. But even then, U.S. actions were insignificant, and the weak People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan government, Afghan political instability, and the Soviet insistence on upholding the Brezhnev Doctrine were far greater factors in causing the Soviet Union to react: in fact, the United States did not even expect the USSR to invade. Ultimately, the Soviet Union became bogged down in a quagmire also because of its poor economic situation.

****

**Grade (Question 1)**
**A-** / 4.5 GP

**Grade (Question 2)**
**A** / 5.0 GP